>>You know, it's not surprising
that in this day and age,
the most up-to-date
and respectable form
of academic philosophy
taught in our universities
is what is called
logical analysis.
The logical analyst,
you know, is the kind
of fellow, who, the moment
you say something, you hardly
get a word out of your mouth
before he says, now, just
precisely what do
you mean by that?
You can't take a step
of the way in unfolding
a proposition or a thesis or an
idea without his going minutely
into the meaning of
each word that you say.
And as a result of
this sort of technique,
most logical analysts have
come to the conclusion
that the problems that have
been discussed by philosophers
for several thousand years are
mostly meaningless problems.
Because when you
look very precisely
at the form of words in
which they're stated,
and you analyze each word bit by
bit, you come to the conclusion
that it didn't
really mean anything.
But I think there's a profound
fallacy in this, because it's
based on the assumption
that the meaning of words
is supposed to be precise.
But unfortunately, for this
sort of approach to things,
we're living in a world
which isn't precise,
where nature on the whole
is extraordinary vague.
I mean, it would be
very nice for purposes
of precise calculation
if the Earth,
in its orbit around the sun,
went around in a neat 360 days.
But it doesn't.
It goes around in 365 and
some wretched fraction.
Everything's a little odd.
Everything's a
little off center.
For example, how are we to
decide exactly when now is?
When is now?
If I look at my watch, and take
a good look at the second hand
to find out exactly where now
is, well, that secondhand,
I can see it.
So it must have some size.
So let's take out
a magnifying glass.
Then it appears that
the thing that marks now
looks about so wide.
And then, well, let's
draw it a bit finer,
and draw it a bit
finer, but we never
seem to be able to get
the end of analyzing it.
Now, you see, is fuzzy.
It's vague.
It's like the field
of vision which
you have in front of your eyes.
You can see clearly
in the middle,
but going out to
the sides, things
get a little bit blurred.
Or where exactly does the
head stop and the neck begin?
Is it here?
We can't really decide.
The only way to be
perfectly clear about where
the head stops and the neck
begins is to chop off the head.
Then you got a
neat dividing line.
In other words, the whole
process of analysis is
a process of chopping,
of cutting apart,
of approaching nature with a
knife, with a dividing line,
with a scalpel. .
And although there
is most definitely
a place in life for precision,
for clear distinctions,
for the attitude of the
knife, this kind of thing
can be enormously overdone.
And if one approaches
the poet-- I
remember a cartoon once
I saw in a newspaper.
It showed Shakespeare walking
on the clouds of immortality,
holding his head
in his hands, oh.
And he was being pursued
by a pedestrian little man
wearing a cap and gown,
saying, Mr. Shakespeare,
your use of the
conjunction "if."
And one knows all too well a
certain style of personality
which likes to be precise,
the sort of person
who always in his
opinions and attitudes
seems to be using his
thought as a means of tearing
other people to pieces.
Isn't it wonderful
to be equipped
with a rigorous
philosophical method that
can tear all fuzzy
thinking to shred?
You know, The.
Kind of person who says,
I don't like fuzziness.
I like to be definite,
clear, and ridiculous.
You almost feel that person's
got his knife into life.
Or sometimes you meet among
scientists the sort of person
who likes to talk
about brute facts.
Why must facts be brute?
Hard and clear facts aren't also
facts that are soft and vague?
But you see, that
kind of attitude
represents, and in a way
caricatures, something
that is, on the whole,
rather characteristic
of the total attitude
of Western civilization
to the environment.
One of the first things
that Oriental peoples notice
about us so-called white
people is our noses.
After all, the bridge of a
Chinese nose is rather flat.
Same with Negroes.
When they see us Caucasians
for the first time, what they
notice about us is this
nose that goes out like this
and seems to be prodding
into everything,
and the deep-set eyes
with a fixed stare.
And if you look at old
Japanese screens which
show what we call caricatures,
but what they thought
were fairly good representations
of the first Western people
they saw.
They look like tenjin or goblins
because of their long noses.
For it seems that
this Western man
has this prodder out in front of
him, which is into everything.
He can't leave anything alone.
And although, as I say, there
is a place for precision,
nevertheless a
fundamentally hostile
cutting up attitude
to life gives us
dead knowledge instead
of living knowledge.
It kills things.
You know, it's a way of
approaching everything
rather on the lines of the
old story about Achilles
and the tortoise.
You know, perhaps, the problem
of Achilles and the tortoise.
Achilles on the tortoise
agree to have a race.
But because Achilles can run
twice as fast as the tortoise,
the tortoise gets a head start.
Achilles begins here.
And the tortoise begins here.
Now then, when the tortoise
has gone half the distance
between his starting point
and Achilles' starting point,
when the tortoise goes
that much and is here,
Achilles, who can run twice as
fast, moves from here to here.
Then the tortoise goes half
as far as that distance.
Achilles does twice as
much, and he lands up here.
And then the tortoise
goes half as far
as he went again
and lands up here.
Achilles does twice as
much, and he's here.
And so the tortoise
goes half as far again.
And Achilles does twice as
much, and he lands up here.
And notice you see, Achilles
is still behind the tortoise.
And the next time the tortoise
will go half as much as that.
And Achilles will
come up to here.
And we shall go on
doing this, thinking
about smaller and smaller
and smaller intervals.
And as a result
of this, Achilles
will never overtake
the tortoise.
Now, of course, in actual
life, Achilles jolly
well does overtake the tortoise.
He goes right by him.
But why this is a
problem is it is
a way of thinking about the
situation that is infinite
and indefinitely analytical.
It doesn't, as it
were, let life go on,
but it stops to analyze
the whole business.
It breaks it down into minuter
and minuter and minuter
quantities so that the
whole thing is delayed.
The whole situation is, as
it were, stopped and killed.
And this will always
happen whenever
we get into the bind, the rut of
trying to think too precisely.
And it's for this reason
that the Taoist and I
think also the Confucian
philosophers of China
are very mistrustful of
logic chopping, of being too
analytical about the
meaning of words.
Let's take, for
example, a word that
is absolutely fundamental to
Chinese thought, a word which
I've used a great deal
in this program-- "Tao."
You know, this is in
English spelled this way.
Tao in Chinese.
We usually translate that
"the way--" the way of nature,
the way of things.
But that's only one
of its many meanings.
Indeed, the term is
so difficult to define
that Lao-Tzu-- you know
this man, the man who
was the founder of
Taoist philosophy.
L-A-O T-Z-U. Lao-Tzu started
out his book by saying--
and this is a
phrase which already
shows how many
meanings the word has.
Tao, which can be Tao.
But here the word means spoken.
It has that double meaning.
"The Tao which can be
spoken is not the eternal--"
the regular, or you might
say the real-- "tao."
Oh yes, he was inconsistent.
He then went on to write
a whole book about it.
But really the whole purport of
the book is to show that Tao,
the fundamental
nature of the world,
is something you cannot
get too precise about.
You can't think about it
and understand it that way.
In other words, what is
the fundamental basis
of one's life as of
one's thought always
has to remain undefined.
You see, if you insist--
and Chinese philosophers
and scholars always are
very clear about this.
If you insist on defining
works meticulously,
you always have to
have other words
to define your definitions.
And then you have to have
words to define those words
and words to define those words.
And there's no end to it.
Or otherwise you can get around
this by going in a circle.
You know, when you
look up the dictionary,
and look up "to be," you find
the definition "to exist."
All right.
You look up "to exist," and you
find the definition "to be."
And then where are you?
Either you go around in a
circle, which fundamentally
tells you nothing,
or else you go
on and on and on
getting more meticulous,
and you never arrive.
Once a Western psychologist
asked a Chinese friend,
what do you mean by Tao?
And the friend said go and
look out of the window.
And he went and look
out of the window.
What do you see?
He said, I see houses
and the street.
What else?
I see people moving around.
I see clouds in the sky.
What else?
And the wind is blowing.
The Chinese extended his
hand like this and said,
that is the Tao.
And so I remember too a
very great Japanese artist
who was teaching over
here in the United States.
And he was always being
pressed by his students
to define himself.
And he used certain expressions.
They say, now exactly
what do you mean?
They were always saying this.
And one day, he got mad.
And he said, what's
the matter with you.
Can't you feel?
And so it is that there
are certain basic ideas,
like Tao, which the Chinese
feel must come to us.
We can't go out to get them.
We can't grab them.
They must come to us in the same
way as light comes to our eyes.
This thing, then, is
mysterious and unknown,
like the hermit sage in one
of the most famous of all
Chinese poems,
Jia Dao's "Seeking
for the Hermit in
Vain." "I asked the boy
beneath the pines.
He said, the master's gone
alone herb picking, somewhere
on the mountain, cloud
hidden, whereabouts unknown."
The whole power of the poem is
in the mysterious imprecision
of the old man's whereabouts,
which, somehow or other, brings
the spirit of the
hermit sage closer
to the inquirer than
an actual meeting.
His absence says more
than his presence.
Lost somewhere on the
cloud-hidden mountain,
he communicates
far more than if he
had come down to
explain himself.
And the spirit would
be totally missed
by the literal-minded,
no-nonsense sort of person,
who at this point,
would want to clear away
the clouds and the mystery,
to rush in and find out just
exactly where the
old fellow has gone,
and just what herbs
he is picking.
You know, it's
absolutely impossible
to understand and appreciate
our natural universe
unless you know when
to stop investigating.
In our restlessness,
we're always
tempted to climb every hill
and cross every skyline
to find out what lies beyond.
Yet as you get
older and wiser, it
isn't just flagging
energy, but rather
increasing wisdom
that teaches you
to look at mountains
from below, or perhaps
just climb them a little way.
For at the top, you can no
longer see the mountain.
And beyond on the
other side, there
is perhaps just another
valley like this.
An old Indian aphorism
says, "What is beyond
is that which is also here."
And you mustn't mistake this
for a kind of blase boredom,
tiring of adventure.
It's the startling recognition
that in the place where
we are now, we have
already arrived.
This is it.
What we are seeking is, if
we are not totally blind,
already here.
For if you must follow that
trail up the mountainside
to its bitter end,
you will discover
that it leads eventually
right back to the suburbs.
But only an exceedingly
stupid person
will think that that's
where the trail really goes.
For the actual truth
is that the trail
goes to every single
place that it crosses.
It leads also to where you
are standing and watching it.
Watching it vanish
into the hills,
you are already in the true
beyond to which it leads.
Many a time, I have
had intense delight
in listening to some hidden
waterfall in a mountain canyon,
a sound all the more wonderful
since I have set aside
the urge to ferret the thing
out, clear up the mystery,
and find out just where
the stream comes from
and where it goes.
Every stream, every road,
if followed persistently
and meticulously to its
end, leads nowhere at all.
And this is why the compulsively
investigative mind is always
landing up in what
it believes to be
the disillusion, the
hard and bitter reality
of the actual facts.
Playing a violin is,
after all, only scratching
cats' entrails with horse hair.
The stars in heave
are, after all,
only radioactive rocks and gas.
But this is the
illusion that truth
is to be found only
by picking everything
to pieces like a spoiled child.
This is why the
painters of the Far East
so seldom tell all, why they
avoid filling in every detail,
and why they leave
in their paintings
great areas of
emptiness and vagueness.
These aren't just
unfilled background.
They are integral parts
of the whole composition,
suggestive and pregnant voids
and mists which leave something
to our imagination, even
though we don't make
the mistake of trying
actually to fill them
in with detail in
the mind's eye.
We let them remain suggestive.
"Autumn clouds,
vague and obscure.
The evening, lonely and chilled.
I felt the dampness on my
garments, but saw no spot
and heard no sound of rain."
"Cliffs that rise a thousand
feet without a break.
Lake that stretches a
hundred miles without a wave.
Sands that are white through
all the year without a stain.
Pine tree woods, winter
and summer, evergreen.
Streams that forever flow
and flow without a pause.
Trees that for 20,000
years your vows have kept.
You have suddenly healed the
pain of a traveler's heart
and moved his brush
to write a new song."
"There was something vague
before heaven and earth arose.
How calm, how void.
It stands alone, unchanging.
It acts everywhere, untiring.
It may be considered the mother
of everything under heaven.
I do not know its name, but
call it by the word Tao."
"The Tao is something
and indistinct.
How indistinct, how blurred,
yet within it, our images.
How blurred, how indistinct,
yet within it are things.
How dim, how confused, yet
within it is creative power."
"Picking chrysanthemums
along the eastern fence.
Gazing in silence of
the southern hills.
The birds fly home in pairs
through the soft mountain
air of dusk.
In all these things,
there is a deep meaning.
But when we are
about to express it,
we suddenly forget the words."
"The song of birds,
the voices of insects,
are all means of conveying
truth to the mind.
In flowers and grasses, we
see messages of the Tao.
The scholar, pure and clear of
mind, serene and open of heart,
should find in everything
what nourishes him.
But if you want to know
where the flowers come from,
even the god of
spring doesn't know."
"Things are produced around us,
but no one knows the whence.
They issue forth, but
no one sees the portal.
Men, one and all, value
that part of knowledge
which is known.
They do not know how to avail
themselves of the unknown
in order to reach knowledge.
Is not this misguided?"
But it isn't by pushing
relentlessly and aggressively
beyond those hills
that we discover
this unknown and persuade
nature to disclose her secrets.
What is beyond,
that is also here.
Any place where we
are may be considered
the center of the universe.
Anywhere that we stand
can be considered
the destination of our journey.
But we have to be
receptive and open.
We have, in other words,
to do what Lao-Tzu advised
when he said,
"While being a man,
yet one should also preserve
a certain femininity.
And thereby one will become a
channel for the whole universe.
And you know, that's one of
the things which I believe,
in our culture of the
West, is submerged.
The feminine values
are despised values.
And we find,
typically among men,
a strange kind of
reluctance to be anything
but a man, a kind of
anxiety to be 100% male.
And that's a kind of monster.
A man who is 100%
male, 100% tough guy,
is a sort of human
mollusk who has
no softness and no sensitivity.
And indeed, it's a common
psychological observation
that people who are
constantly anxious to prove
their masculinity, who are
scared to death of being sissy,
of being weak, of
being unaggressive,
those are the very
people who have
doubts about their
own masculinity, who
are not really sure of it.
And so there is a
tremendous necessity for us
to value alongside, as it
were, the aggressive masculine
element symbolized by the sword,
the receptive feminine element
symbolized, perhaps,
by the open flower.
For after all, our human
senses are not knives.
They're not hooks.
They are the soft ball of
the eye, the delicate drum
of the ear, the soft skin
on the tips of the fingers
and on the body.
It is through these
delicate receptive things
that we basically receive
our knowledge of the world.
And therefore its is through a
kind of weakness and softness
that it is possible for
knowledge to come to us.
So putting it in
another way, we have
to come to terms with nature by
wooing her rather than fighting
her.
Not just putting nature
at the so-called distance
of objectivity, as
if she were an enemy
to be shot, but something
rather to be known by embrace,
like a beloved wife.
For you see, what does one
really want to know about it?
Does one rather want to
manage the whole thing?
Does one want to be a kind
of omnipotent god in control
of it all?
Or does one, rather,
want to enjoy it?
One cannot, after all, enjoy
what you all the time anxious
about controlling.
One of the nice things
about one's own body
is you don't have to think
about it all the time.
If you had, when you
woke up in the morning,
to think about every
detail of your circulation,
you would never get to the day.
As was well said,
the mystery of life
is not a problem to be
solved, but a reality
to be experienced.